# Models with one variable in continuous time

In the previous chapters we have considered discrete time models, in which time is measured in integers. This worked well to describe processes that happen in periodic cycles, like cell division or heart pumping. Many biological systems do not work this way. Change can happen continuously, that is, at any point in time. For instance, the concentration of a biological molecule in the cell changes gradually, as does the voltage across the cell membrane in a neuron.

The models for continuously changing variables require their own set of mathematical tools. Differential equations use derivatives to describe how a variable changes with time. There is a tremendous amount of knowledge accumulated by mathematicians, physicists and engineers for analyzing and solving differential equations. There are many classes of differential equations for which it is possible to find analytic solutions, often in the form of “special functions.” Differential equations courses for physicists and engineers are typically focused on learning about the variety of existing tools for solving a few types of differential equations. For the purposes of biological modeling, knowing how to solve a limited number of differential equations is of limited usefulness. We will instead focus on learning how to analyze the behavior of differential equations in general, without having to solve them on paper.

We will begin with a brief overview of linear differential equations and their solutions. 


In contrast to linear differential equations, which can be solved in general, nonlinear differential equations may not be solvable even theoretically. When solutions cannot be found on paper, we have two options: 1) qualitative or graphical tools, such as finding equilibrium points and their stability, allow us to predict the long-term dynamics of the solution; 2) numerical solutions, which use computational methods to construct a sequence of numbers that approximate the true solution.
